
00:45
Pouran Khavar (67) says she was born in Tehran, Iran. She says life was very civilized when the Shah was King.
2:29
Pouran says her father taught high school and her mother was a homemaker. She remembers liking literature and wanting to become a translator.
3:37
Pouran talks about her marriage being arranged. She says her future husband was studying in the United States. Pouran says she did not speak English nor did she want to leave Tehran. She says she was 18 years old when she was married.
7:26
Pouran says she had her first child, a son, when she was 21 and living in Las Vegas.
8:49
Pouran says she and her husband were living in Iran again when she was pregnant with her 2nd child, a daughter. She says female babies have to be beautiful in order to be accepted.
12:24
Pouran talks about how the regimes in Iran had changed between her first and second pregnancies. She says the things they had been promised if they returned to Iran were lies.
16:24
Pouran remembers the American hostages being taken in Iran on the same day her husband was trying to get them visas to leave the country. Pouran says they could not leave Iran for the next 9 years. She remembers people being executed.
19:52
Aggie Ebrahimi Bazaz (39) asks her mom about naming her. Pouran pronounces Aggie's given name in Farsi and says it means the gemstone, agate.
24:05
Pouran talks about returning to the United States with just her 2 children. She remembers how sad her son looked on the 18 hour flight.
29:34
Pouran says she picked Atlanta, Georgia, as their new home because she had a friend from high school living here. She says her biggest challenge was that her kids did not have their father. Pouran remembers not wanting people to know she was divorced.
33:10
Pouran says she is happy that her children are successful and that they know right from wrong.
36:00
Pouran remembers the time she had tried to become a teacher in Iran and was not accepted for reasons that had nothing to do with her ability to teach. She says she did get to fulfill her goal of being a translator, both in Iran and in the United States.
37:25
Pouran says her hope for Iran is that the regime changes. She says she is allowed to say this because she lives in the United States.
Participants

    Pouran Khavar
    Aggie Ebrahimi Bazaz

Recording Locations
Virtual Recording
Venue / Recording Kit

    Atlanta StoryBooth

Tier

    Virtual Interview

Initiatives

    Anwar Collection of Muslim Voices
    Tapestry of Voices

Keywords

    Arranged marriage
    Culture
    Immigration Stories
    Iran Hostage Crisis

Subjects

    Divorce
    Education
    Motherhood

Places

    Atlanta GA
    Tehran Iran

Transcript

StoryCorps uses secure speech-to-text technology to provide machine-generated transcripts. Transcripts have not been checked for accuracy and may contain errors. Learn more about our FAQs through our Help Center or do not hesitate to get in touch with us if you have any questions.

[00:03] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Great.

[00:03] POURAN KHAVAR: My name is Aggie Ebrahimi Bazaz I am almost 40 years old. Today is Saturday May 15, 2021. Based here in Atlanta, Georgia. Sitting with my mom who is Pouran Khavar

[00:21] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: And I'm the mom. My name is Pouran Khavar I also live in Atlanta, Georgia. I'm 67 years old and today is Saturday May 15, 2021. 2021.

[00:37] POURAN KHAVAR: Cool. So mom, where were you born?

[00:41] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I was born in Tehran, Iran.

[00:44] POURAN KHAVAR: And how many children do you have?

[00:46] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I have two children, one son and one daughter.

[00:51] POURAN KHAVAR: And what was Tehran like when you were born? What do you remember about Tehran when you were born or when you were a child?

[00:59] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Tehran was civilized up to the modern city when I was growing up and when we had Shah as the king and we often we were recognized by the entire world and our passport had one of the highest value in the passport index rates. We were compared to cities like Paris, New York. Tehran was Paris, New York and big metropolitan cities. And everything was 180 degrees different from what you see today in Iran or in Tehran.

[01:59] POURAN KHAVAR: So did you enjoy growing up in Tehran?

[02:02] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: We didn't know at the time that we supposed to enjoy it. And now we really look back and see how fortunate we were that we were growing up and the date that era that we had the king and we had all those comfort level of living there.

[02:23] POURAN KHAVAR: What did your parents do? What was their occupation?

[02:26] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: My dad taught high school and my mom was a housewife.

[02:32] POURAN KHAVAR: And how many siblings did you have?

[02:35] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: We were a small family. I have one sister and one brother.

[02:39] POURAN KHAVAR: When you were going to school, what did you dream of being? What career did you want for yourself?

[02:46] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Well, I was pursued by my dad to go and study math because in those days after the ninth grade, you would choose a major between three majors of natural science, math and literature. But I always knew that I like literature so I wanted to do something in that field. But my dream job then was to become a translator.

[03:21] POURAN KHAVAR: That's nice.

[03:22] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Yes.

[03:25] POURAN KHAVAR: Well, how did you meet my dad?

[03:29] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I married your dad. I didn't meet your dad. It was arranged marriage which was between my dad and his mom. They were co workers, they were colleagues and they were introduced to each other. And there was a mediator, one of the other teachers. So they. He was studying in US and wanted to marry someone from Iran and bring her over here. And they decided that since my dad was a very honorable man, they thought that probably his, the other would be the best suited for him. So that's how they chose each other.

[04:23] POURAN KHAVAR: Did, did you speak English?

[04:25] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: At the time, not even a war.

[04:27] POURAN KHAVAR: So when you had a dream of being a translator, you didn't yet speak English?

[04:31] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No.

[04:32] POURAN KHAVAR: So when you knew that you could travel to the US with your husband, potential husband, did that excite you?

[04:39] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No, it didn't. Because I really didn't want to leave my friends, my country. I beg them not to send me until I at least finish some of the studies that I starting to continue. But my dad said that no, you have to. If you get. If you are married, you have to go, you cannot stay here, you have to be with her over there. So I rather to stay another year and enjoyed myself, my friends and I really didn't want to leave Iran.

[05:19] POURAN KHAVAR: But so what? Why did you?

[05:22] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I had to. I was. I was pushed. I was chosen or my husband was chosen for me. We got married and in matter of a week, your dad came from here. We met once to. For him to see me and I see him. And then after that we met two other times. Once with the chaperone was his sister, even to a movie. They talked and laughed and everything. And I was sitting over there, I didn't understand what they're talking about. And then another time we went shopping and then we were married. So.

[06:05] POURAN KHAVAR: And how old were you when you moved to the US with him?

[06:09] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I wasn't. I had my 19th birthday here, so I was 18 something. I just finished high school. I had graduated from high school and I had started taking courses in college. For accounting. Not back there.

[06:26] POURAN KHAVAR: Oh, for accounting.

[06:28] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: For accounting. But then, well, everything changed.

[06:34] POURAN KHAVAR: Did you always know you wanted children?

[06:36] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Yes, that I always knew. My room when growing up was. The walls were filled, were covered with babies pictures, all the cute babies from the top to bottom. So I really wanted children. I always knew that. I want children.

[06:57] POURAN KHAVAR: Why did you want children?

[06:58] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I love children. I don't know. I would connect with them. I always thought they're so innocent and there's. You can mold them and, you know, you can play with them, they're cute and all these things. So I really love children.

[07:15] POURAN KHAVAR: How old were you when you had your first child? And who was that?

[07:19] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: It was your brother. And I had him when I was 20. 20 years or 21, I think 1974. So 21.

[07:34] POURAN KHAVAR: Where was he born?

[07:35] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: In Las Vegas.

[07:37] POURAN KHAVAR: And were you happy or scared or both?

[07:40] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I was happy. And my mom came over to help me with delivery and everything. And I wasn't scared. No, I wasn't scared. I was scared of the future, what would hold. Because I knew your dad not going to be seeking around forever. But I didn't care. I was happy to have my son.

[08:02] POURAN KHAVAR: What was he like as a child?

[08:07] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I don't know. Whatever say I say about you two is going to be like cliche that our mother says about the kids. But it is what it is. It was. He was the most beautiful, the most gorgeous creature I've ever known in my life.

[08:23] POURAN KHAVAR: So did you know you wanted a daughter?

[08:26] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Always, Always I wanted a daughter like a doll. I wanted to comb the hair, take it back, but I didn't clothes. I always loved to have a daughter. I prayed for a daughter.

[08:40] POURAN KHAVAR: So what did you pray about?

[08:42] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I pray to have a daughter. But when I was pregnant with you, we were living back home in Iran and culture and the environment and the society, everything is nothing that you see here. So it's totally different. Everything is elevated toward the religion and the traditions and the customs and superstitious and all this because they changed it. The government, the new Islamic government changed everything to the back to 1400 years back. So we moved backward for so everything now was, it was so, so, so difficult for a girl to be raised in Iran, in Iran's society. And given all the facts that I had seen and I had experienced in my life with your dad and his family, I knew that if I have a girl, it has to be certain kind of girl for them to accept her. And otherwise they rather, they all rather to have a son. And you know, first of all, your dad didn't want anymore, I mean, didn't want a baby, another child. But I was, I wanted what I wanted and so what I prayed for, like always the first thing would be to be happy, I mean to be healthy. Because I've seen so many cases that kids were born with defects and diseases. And then I wanted a girl that have a great future, not like us women in Iran. And of course I wanted, I gave God a blueprint of what I wanted. Like I want my daughter to be like this with the blonde hair, white complexion, small mouth and cheeks and all to be beautiful. So they would accept her as a, as a child and as their family. And I got what I wanted.

[11:08] POURAN KHAVAR: So did they accept me?

[11:11] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: They did, the very first minute. Their approval always was like, oh, how pretty she is. That would be their stamp of approval from my father's side, right, from the father's side, whatever. And probably my father's side too. My father, not my side, but my father's side. And male chauvinistic is in our society, it is. And they look at women all the women as their vanity. They look at their vanity. They don't look at what the future would hold for them. What can we do for them? What, how can we support them? So the first thing, your grandmother, your dad's mom said that she looks like an angel. And your dad was so happy that he ran and called his girlfriend to tell him that he had a very beautiful girl, his girlfriend.

[12:12] POURAN KHAVAR: Can you just explain briefly? So you had my brother in Las Vegas and then I was born in Iran. So Katie, you explain what happened there.

[12:20] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Well, when we were in States, things were changing in Iran. And of course your dad was amongst those who was very active in changing regime in Iran. Shah had two major oppositions, religious leaders and leftist group, Marxist group. He was scared of Marxists and he would stop them, do everything to stop them in his power. But he wasn't scared of religious leaders and fundamentalists. So when we were here, we would go to the and they were very, very, very active. The religious groups were in United States and all over the world. They had meetings. They would gather young people like us and they would brainwash everybody. So we would go to these meetings. I would just go follow him, but he would go. And I could see that things are. We could see things were changing. And when we graduated, both of us graduated from University, University of Tulsa, the same. We graduated in May and in I think in few months before that Shah had left the country. So the regime was changed and we decided that. And by then my son was. Your brother was I think 6 years old, 79, 5 years old. So we decided that we go back and give it a try. Because now that Shaw has gone, everything is perfect. We thought or they told us everything is going to be perfect. There's going to be new society, new opportunities, new life. Everything is new. No prisoner, no political prisoners, no torture. Everybody has going to be prosperous. The oil money is going to be divided between everybody in Iran. Every thing Rosie picture they could picture for us. So we decided to gather our stuff, go back. I didn't want to go back, but he wanted because he studied petroleum chemical engineering and he thought that he's going to find a job in his field petroleum in Iran. So we went there in May and few months I wrote that on my description for them. A few months after we arrived in Iran we found out that nothing they have said was according to the truth. Everything was a lie. And that place is no place to be living and raising families. Everyone had gone. It was beginning of the revolution. Everything was changing so fast. They were Trying quote unquote clean everything. Starting from universities, workplaces. By cleaning they meant to get rid of people who were already there and bring the new ones who would believe their philosophy. And they stopped connecting with the outside world and they were isolated. The country was so it was getting bad, really bad. We decided that okay, let's go back and I pushed them to go and get the visa so we can go back, we can come back to States. And especially because I had a, I was accepted by Harvard to go for my master's degree. So I said let's go back and I want to go study. And he finally said okay. The day that he went to the embassy because by at charles time getting a visa would take only 48 hours for Iranians to get a visa to come to United States. And the same day that he went to the embassy to get, to renew our visa to come back and student visa to come back, it was the same day that they captured the hostages. So embassy was closed. So he called and he said that I'm here, everybody is climbing the walls on the embassy and the embassy is closed and I can't get the visa. And I started crying and I knew that something bad is going to happen. And he said, no, no, no, no, it's gonna, it's gonna be fine in few days. And we couldn't leave for nine years. So.

[17:23] POURAN KHAVAR: So two years after that is when.

[17:25] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: You had me 79. Yeah, 81. I had. Yeah, about a year and something.

[17:31] POURAN KHAVAR: So I think you already answered this, but could you just say again briefly, what were some of your fears about having a new baby and that new society?

[17:41] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: They're raising a daughter in a society that everything is dependent on men. They can travel, they can get married, they can't go to school, they can't go to their family members houses if their husband don't let them. They can be free to do whatever their dreams are. They can't. They have limited resources. They have. So it was even for boys. It was even same thing for boys. The universities were closed, schools were so one dimensional and it was just, I want to say hell, but it was. No one in 21st century should live like that. Especially a country that sits on black gold and has 2500 years of civilizations. And we have came all this way with Shaw, especially the last 50 years to reach to that point that Carter, Jimmy Carter called Iran a month before revolution. He called Iran the island of stability. And then all of a sudden everything changed. So Khomeini said when he was in Neufelay Chateau. He said, I'm not going to interfere with the state. I'm going to go to com and be a preacher, be a clergyman. But no, when he came to Iran, he wanted everything. They started executing all the military generals. They executed everybody. They would kill people in the middle of the road. So I knew that this is not the place I want to raise the families. So it was. I was really weary of the fact that I'm going to have a daughter raised in that society. But many, many people have. So I was one of them too.

[19:41] POURAN KHAVAR: So can you pronounce my name in Farsi?

[19:47] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Your name pronounces as agric and is equivalent to English word agate.

[19:56] POURAN KHAVAR: So yeah, go ahead.

[19:58] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: And that is a gemstone, is a very precious gemstone agate. And so is Iran too.

[20:05] POURAN KHAVAR: Is that a very popular name in Iran?

[20:07] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No, it's not. I never heard anybody's name Arabic in Iran. No one had. I knew that when I was pregnant with you. I wanted the customary is that they choose. Most people choose the children's name to start with the same alphabets like VRPs my sisters. My brother starts with P. And I had Ali. So I was looking for a name that starts with this Alphabet A. And I came out with Asal means honey. But everybody else was naming it Asal. I wanted something unique. So I looked and look and I did wanted something I didn't know I'm going to move to United States that's going to be difficult to pronounce it. So I wanted something very, very unique and meaningful. So one day I was playing with my ring. I had a agic ring and I was reading one of the Hoffa is one of the most popular poets in Iran. One of the poems about array and how precious it is. So we had your. One of your cousins were very close to me. He was a religious guy. And I told him about Agir. And he said that I also asked them why you guys men were AGI ring in Iran. I asked him why you guys were ag ring. And he said that because you know that ag the gemstone was first found in the mountain that Prophet Muhammad would go for prey. I said oh, I thinking about name and now is a holy name too. So I chose that and I said oh, that that's going to be so beautiful because it has a meaning. Later on I found out that every culture claims to be the one who discovered earlier like Greek do they said that one of the goddess discovered that Italians do they think they found it on the shoreline of one of the Rivers and is mentioned in Bible a few times. And finally I thought well, if it's mentioned in Bible, it means that and it is a gemstone that they get it from the mountains. It. It develops in the caveats of the rocks and the mountain because has coats in it different course. So I said if that is maybe that prophet story is kind of true too. But when I moved here, I noticed that it's difficult to pronounce. I didn't care about Islam anymore, so. But the name was still beautiful and I love, I love your name.

[23:12] POURAN KHAVAR: Thank you. Do you feel like it fits me?

[23:19] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Very much so, I think very much so. If the first look at you, I said oh yeah, definitely Arya. Yeah, I thought it and then now your cousins, they copied your name and they have Ariel in Iran. But then when I In 1981, no one except one of the singers in States had the others had name. No one else had named their children.

[23:52] POURAN KHAVAR: So yeah, it's a beautiful name. Well, tell me about. So you were in Iran at the time and then how old was I when eventually you moved back to the United states?

[24:05] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I was 28 when I had you. I was 28 when your dad left. I mean mentally left. I fought and I struggled for a few years to have them come back and so my children would have both parents. It didn't work. So I decided that I'm not going to stay there to witness all the miseries and I have to go back. So I came back 1988, when you were seven, before you, your seventh birthday, I took you and your brother and I moved back to States.

[24:52] POURAN KHAVAR: So who moved back with you? How many people?

[24:55] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: You, your brother and myself.

[24:57] POURAN KHAVAR: Just the three of us.

[24:58] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Yeah. He had, he had remarried and had his children and he would have not live my dad. Yeah.

[25:04] POURAN KHAVAR: And he stayed in Iran.

[25:05] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: And he stayed in Iran.

[25:06] POURAN KHAVAR: Well, what did you know that my name wouldn't be pronounceable in.

[25:11] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: In the United States when I came here because for Americans they're not familiar with the Alphabet and even my last name. But we worked at it. I get or Aggie is very close to what it is. So we didn't totally change the name, your identity, but I knew it was going to be because you had your last name is a little bit difficult. But I remember in school whenever they were calling you to give you rewards, every grade they had the highest. I mean the hardest time to pronounce your name because they would see the spelling A G H I G H and they would hi AG hi or I should have probably changed it then to Aggie. But I didn't want to mess with your record, you know, I didn't want to mess it up for the. For the future. Future purposes.

[26:11] POURAN KHAVAR: Right.

[26:11] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: So.

[26:12] POURAN KHAVAR: Because when we came over, you tried to write my name in English the way it sounds in Farsi. So you spelled it a G H.

[26:18] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I G H. Yeah. I mean that was your name. Yeah. Thinking that someone would make sense of it. I don't know.

[26:26] POURAN KHAVAR: Right. Did it ever make you sad that people wouldn't know what the word meant or.

[26:32] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No, no. As understandable is they're not used to it. They are. They never been introduced to it. I was forcing something to them that was unfamiliar. So they tried. They were very, very nice. They tried, they did their best. They had hardest time to make sense of it and it was my fault. I should have spelled it from the beginning AGI, but that would take away your name from. I mean the meaning of that. So. But eventually that happened. So yeah, when you grow up, you change that. Yeah.

[27:05] POURAN KHAVAR: But did you ever feel sad that the meaning would be lost here at least.

[27:12] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: It was important to me that I know the meaning. And those around us who matters as a family, they knew that is Aggie. And those who would get close to you, you would explain to them. So it is easy, you know, it's easy fix if they don't know some people, they're just strangers. Doesn't matter my own name, I never change it, but it has been pronounced different ways. Never, ever bothers me. It is. Who is it the Shakespeare that says that what is in the name that rose with any other names still smells the same and looks the same. So a rose is a rose. Whatever you call it.

[27:56] POURAN KHAVAR: What is your name and how do you. How do different people pronounce it?

[28:00] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Poor Ann, like poor and Pouran Pouran Pouran Different versions of pran. And well, how do you pronounce it in Farsi? Pouran I. I'm. I don't expect them to pronounce it. I don't pronounce most of the Americans name correct way. So.

[28:24] POURAN KHAVAR: Do you have a specific memory about traveling to the US with my brother and I?

[28:32] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Yeah. One thing that I remember is that your brother did not speak even one word. It is. It is 18 hours flight from Tehran to New York. And all this time he looked so sad and he was so isolated. He isolated himself from me and you and everybody and didn't even say a word. Either slept or just looked sad. I remember that. I don't know, I never found out he didn't want to come or. But he's happy he's here. He wanted, I think he always says that his best thing happened, but I don't, I didn't feel it. I didn't feel it then, so.

[29:22] POURAN KHAVAR: But now he's happy he's in New York. Why did you choose Atlanta and not New York?

[29:29] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: You have to have somewhere, somewhere to land. I didn't know anybody in New York. I had family in California and you guys had a family in California, but I didn't want to go to them because they were all your father's family. And my family in most of them didn't know I was divorced. So my, I just knew that I have to leave Iran. That's the one thing that was certain. I had a friend, high school friend that I helped her to come to states when I was in Las Vegas and now she was in Atlanta and I joined her.

[30:06] POURAN KHAVAR: We get daddy. Oh, that's it. She was at Atlanta and you joined her here. Are you glad you chose Atlanta?

[30:15] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No.

[30:16] POURAN KHAVAR: You're not?

[30:18] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No. I don't, I don't know what, but I think I should have gone to a city like, closer to where I was born, like Tehran. But it was only option I had so I came here and it has been our home for past 33 years, 32 years. So yeah, I think it's home. I won't change it for Iran, but it is home.

[30:49] POURAN KHAVAR: Well, there were a lot of challenges, but what were some of the hardest things about being a single parent here with two children in a totally different country without any family.

[31:00] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: My biggest challenge was my kids growing up without a father. Doesn't matter where not having a father figure. Your dad told us that, oh, don't worry when you go there, most of the kids don't have father, have one family member, one parent, families and they would blend very well. Don't worry. And I never thought either myself or you guys going to blend and you didn't. It was difficult because my friends, my, I was in environment that most Iranians were and they were 99%, I mean 100% married with the children, I mean with the father and mother. And I hated to take you to those parties because of the look on you guys face when the fathers were around. And the most challenging things for me was my kids being deprived of having a father and the mother, two parents, family.

[32:03] POURAN KHAVAR: Growing up, I don't remember ever caring about other kids fathers or thinking that they were.

[32:09] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Oh no. Oh, maybe it was in my mind. I don't Know, but you.

[32:13] POURAN KHAVAR: You were so concerned about. Yeah, but I never felt. And those fathers were not people I would want as my father anyway.

[32:20] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No, not that you wanted those fathers. That. The feeling of that. See how that kids sitting on his father's or her father's lab and maybe it was on my mind, but it was always one of my regrets that why couldn't he. Just for the sake of children to be. To be around.

[32:40] POURAN KHAVAR: Yeah. I think, you know, Ali and I always say that you did such a good job parenting us.

[32:47] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I hope so. I don't know. I'm not sure myself. But I'm happy how you guys turned out. I'm happy you did pursue your education. I'm happy you are successful and Ali is successful. I am. I thank God every night for you guys to be healthy, to know the right from wrong, and to always strive to do the right thing. I am. I'm blessed. And I won't change it for anything else.

[33:40] POURAN KHAVAR: Are you glad you brought us here?

[33:42] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I sure am. I am. Because we wouldn't survive in Iran. There were so many things working against us, and now it's working against everybody else. Everybody wants to leave Iran, and that is why migration is so high in Iran. If they can leave, they would leave. But other than that, my family situation in Iran, you guys, is everything. Everything. People, neighbors, families, work, job, everything was not the way I wanted. Schools. Like, I remember one day I went to school and they. Ali was in grade school and they said that. They called me in school and they said that, oh, your son refused to step on Americans flag. They had American flag painted on the ground and they. Every morning they wanted the kids to go over it. And then I knew that this is not just because I loved America, just because it's not right to disrespect and force people to choose to disrespect a country. A flag or whatever it is. But in order for you to get to go to the next level, you have to follow their leads. And that was difficult. I got accepted. I took the test to become a teacher. Just like a GRE test in Iran. In Iran. And then I passed it with the. With flying. Yeah.

[35:28] POURAN KHAVAR: With excellence.

[35:29] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: With excellence. And then one day I was waiting for you guys to come home with your dad with food. Somebody knocked at the door, and the guy with the motorcycle came to see how I dress at home and where's my house and what we do at home. And when I opened the door without scarves, with the short sleeves, and he said that you passed with excellence. But you know that teachers are the role model of the children. I said, yeah, yeah. He said, do you think you're a law mother? I said, I can't be. And he said, no, you can't. Look at yourself. Look at the way you dress. You cannot be a role model. And furthermore, what you have studied is no good in Iran. You studied sociology, and sociology, you studied United States society, not Iran society. So you can teach in Iran. So I knew that this is a country that they left us, so I wanted to leave.

[36:36] POURAN KHAVAR: When you came to the U.S. did you ever fulfill your dream of being a translator?

[36:41] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: I fulfilled my dream when I was in Iran. I translated two books. I worked in the magazine, a weekly magazine of the most popular women magazine in Iran, Today's Women. And I was hired by them, worked there for a few years, and then also here I did translate for the county courthouse for Iranians and Afghanians who do not speak English.

[37:16] POURAN KHAVAR: What's your dream for Iran in the future?

[37:20] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Regime change. Regime change. Regime change. Regime change.

[37:26] POURAN KHAVAR: That can't be put on air.

[37:28] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: No, no.

[37:29] POURAN KHAVAR: Because don't they. Doesn't the Iranian government go after people who say that?

[37:34] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Yes, but they. This is not Iran. True. I came here so I can say these things.

[37:42] POURAN KHAVAR: Well, I think those are all of my questions. And I want to say thank you. You for bringing us here and taking such good care of us and having been two parents in one for my brother and I and for having thought so much about our names and having picked such a beautiful, unique name for me.

[38:03] AGGIE EBRAHIMI BAZAZ: Absolutely. Thank you for turning out to be such a beautiful soul and heart.
